IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT
COLES COUNTY, ILLINOIS
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff
vs.
JOSHUA OVERHOLT, Defendant
Case No. 24TR732
BENCH TRIAL AND MOTION TO DISMISS
Report of Proceedings before Honorable Judge Chris Wetzel, June 18, 2024.
Appearances:

Attorney Grant Manning, Assistant State’s Attorney, for the People
Joshua Overholt, Self-Represented Litigant


THE COURT: This is 24TR732. We’ll show that he is—Mister—it’s Joshua Overholt, is that right?
MR. OVERHOLT: Correct.
THE COURT: He is present pro se. Mr. Manning present on behalf of the State. There’s a couple things in this case. First one, and I’ll leave it up to the Defendant after I take the State’s motion. Officer, is it, Monte De Oca?
MR. MANNING: Yes, that is correct.
THE COURT: Is not present because he is in, where was it, a training or?
MR. MANNING: He is actually out of state.
THE COURT: Out of state. So, they filed a motion or asked for a motion to continue the bench trial. Do you have any objection to that?
MR. OVERHOLT: I do. I would like to just get it over with quickly.
THE COURT: Okay. Unfortunately, I can’t get it—I’ve got to hear both—from both sides. All right. And usually I will give at least each party a continuance.
MR. OVERHOLT: Okay.
THE COURT: Because that’s my job is just to make sure that I hear from both sides, not just from the State, but also, from you; and I would do the same thing for you if you came in. If they needed a motion to continue, or needed to get an attorney, or needed something, I try to do everything I could to make sure that your case was heard as well.
MR. OVERHOLT: I’ve got my Motion to Dismiss.
THE COURT: I did see that Motion to Dismiss. Now my question is do you want to continue your Motion to Dismiss until they have—until Officer Monte De Oca is here or do you want to take that Motion to Dismiss now?
MR. OVERHOLT: I ask that you dismiss the case now.
THE COURT: All right. Have you—have a copy of the motion?
MR. MANNING: I do have a copy of the motion.
THE COURT: All right. Do you have any comments to make on the motion?
MR. MANNING: I would just point to the fact that the citation, the Illinois citation is a legally sufficient claim. It does allege facts. It is a charging document. It’s regularly used throughout the State of Illinois. And for these reasons, Your Honor, the citation is legally sufficient to allege the necessary facts for the Defendant to be found guilty of this offense.
THE COURT: All right. And your argument?
MR. OVERHOLT: I have a constitutionally protected right to free speech in Illinois State, United States, and United Nations International Bill of Rights. Article 6 of the United States Constitution says that a State statute cannot take away a federal right. So, there’s no claim.
THE COURT: What claim is—well, how does that effect this traffic ticket?
MR. OVERHOLT: What’s the claim?
THE COURT: It says here their claim is, is unauthorized use of electronic communication device. All right.
MR. OVERHOLT: By speaking?
THE COURT: That’s—I don’t have any evidence. You’re trying to dismiss something. This isn’t—your motion cites a lot of civil litigation. Those Codes of Civil Procedures does not take effect criminal procedure. All the State has to do is provide you notice and the right in the Complaint to tell you what you’ve been charged with, to be able to give you some idea of when it was charged, when it—and to be able to prepare a defense towards that. Statute and case law indicates that Illinois Uniform Citation is considered a Verified Complaint and would be considered a Verified Complaint unless you object to it. If you object to it then the State would have to file a Verified Information, and it be presented—and you can be presented with that in that Information and you would be basically charged with the same offense under an Information verified by the State’s Attorney’s Office.
MR. OVERHOLT: Yeah, I do challenge that.
THE COURT: All right. Then I can give them leave to file that amended Information, if you just file that Information by the next court date. I will order that to be done so you would have a verified Complaint of what the allegation is on. All right.
But, with regards to dismissing, I deny that motion. I think the—well, I’ll strike that. I’ll reserve it until I see the Information. So, once I see the Information, as long as it gives you forth a basis to provide a defense, I’m not saying you’re wrong. I’m not saying you don’t have a legal challenge to the Constitution. I’m not—I don’t know. The question is, is well, that’s your defense so you can present that at trial.
MR. OVERHOLT: It’s just my Motion to Dismiss.
THE COURT: Right.
MR. OVERHOLT: It’s not my defense.
THE COURT: Right.
MR. OVERHOLT: Right.
THE COURT: Okay. I understand. But, that could be a defense if you had whatever it is when it comes down to it. If you file a Motion to Dismiss I don’t think Motion to Dismiss—your Motion to Dismiss doesn’t set forth any constitutional challenges. Yeah, this is more of a civil complaint, like a 2-615, or a 2-619 motion failing to state a claim. Those are more civil in nature. So, if I filed a petition for—if I was suing somebody, somebody could then come back and say, Judge, the Complaint doesn’t state a cause of action; so, therefore, you should dismiss it.
This isn’t—this is a criminal charge and it does state that you were on or about April 11th of ’24 at 4:20 p.m. as you are alleged to committed at Route 16 and Dettro Drive, turning westbound, by committing a violation of 625 ILCS 5/12-610.2 and they put it in here the nature of the offense, unlawful—well, it says electronic communication device and at the bottom is says cell phone use. It even gives you the weather conditions and things of the nature at that time. So, they have provided all the necessary information, but you do have the right to ask it to be verified. And I will order them to—to provide that verified information and put it on file.
Where can they send that to you, sir?
MR. OVERHOLT: I will provide him email address or I can—it’s josh.overholt@gmail.com.
THE COURT: Okay. And what they can do is they can e-file that and then you would automatically get a copy of that—
MR. OVERHOLT: Okay.
THE COURT: —filing straight into your email account.
MR. OVERHOLT: Will it show up in judici as well?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. OVERHOLT: Okay.
THE COURT: All right.
MR. OVERHOLT: Yeah.
THE COURT: So, it will be there. Do you have that email address?
MR. OVERHOLT: Sure.
MR. MANNING: Sure
MR. OVERHOLT: And can I request all the complaints you have against me?
THE COURT: Usually that has to be in writing. And the reason it has to be in writing is because, it isn’t that I would deny it, I just have to understand what they’re requesting. What you think they have; like I want this, this, and this. Because if it was criminal case, as in felony case, we have rules set in our statutes that says your entitled to everything, this, this, and this, under the law. It isn’t the same thing with misdemeanors and traffic. They’re supposed to be expedited proceedings and they’re supposed to be, you know, they—they don’t have those strict rules of discovery. It doesn’t mean you can’t file a motion requesting discovery of information and the State usually will give you everything they have anyway. He probably already has it. My guess is he probably only has a traffic ticket. I don’t know. Maybe he has video. I don’t know. But I’m sure he’ll talk to you.
MR. OVERHOLT: Him or?
THE COURT: Yeah. He’s the one handling the case. This is Mr. Manning.
MR. OVERHOLT: Sure. Nice to meet you.
THE COURT: So, he’ll give you a card. If you have any questions about it, my experience is you don’t have to talk to the State, but my experience is is they’re not hiding anything from you.
MR. OVERHOLT: Sure.
THE COURT: If you want to see if they have it or they need to go out and look and see if the police officer has it and they don’t have it. They’ll check and tell you, no, we don’t have it; or, we do have it. If they don’t have it and you think they should, then you can make the arguments that the officer had—should have had this on. I don’t know.
MR. OVERHOLT: He had a body camera on. It shows this.
THE COURT: So—so, if he does have it then they will try to track that down. A lot of times they’re not hiding anything. It’s just a mass of evidence, massive amount of body camera footage they have to go through. So, but, call them and they can check on it. Okay? All right.
MR. OVERHOLT: Is that it?
THE COURT: Well, we’re going to set a new date.
MR. OVERHOLT: Okay.
THE COURT: All right?
MR. OVERHOLT: All right.
THE COURT: And then if you write his—write that email down so he can give you—
MR. OVERHOLT: Do you want it right now?
MR. MANNING: Yeah, go ahead. Just write it on the top there.
THE COURT: —so that he can give you that new Information.
What are you looking at timewise, Mr. Manning?
MR. MANNING: I think if we just continue using that July 24th date that would be—
THE COURT: Did we set something at 1:30 today?
MR. MANNING: Oh, yes, we did. We set the speeding bench trial that we had continued this morning to 1:30 on that.
THE COURT: Do you remember the case number on that?
MR. MANNING: 24MT125.
THE COURT: So, I have a—and that’s a 1:30, and I have a 2. Do you want to set this at 2:30?
MR. MANNING: That’s fine.
THE COURT: Or do you want to set it after the status we have Mr. Reed? I think it’s a rule.
MR. MANNING: I’ll defer to the Court, Defendant for that one. It doesn’t make a difference to me.
MR. OVERHOLT: I’m open.
THE COURT: Let’s set it at 2:30.
And just for the record, I am reserving the ruling on the Motion to Dismiss until I receive the Information that I see it’s placed on file because that’s the new Information. So, if they don’t allege something in that Information that’s necessary, then I can reserve that ruling on it. All right.
MR. OVERHOLT: Can you clarify it for me?
THE COURT: Uh-huh.
MR. OVERHOLT: Who’s they?
THE COURT: The State’s Attorney’s Office.
MR. OVERHOLT: State’s Attorney.
THE COURT: They would be filing that Information. Once they file that new Information that you requested, the verified Information, it has to set certain elements that’s necessary in the Information. So, you—your Motion to Dismiss is alleging that they didn’t give you that Information. They don’t have a basis to proceed under their—under the law.
MR. OVERHOLT: So, the State’s Attorney will show how this statute applies to me?
THE COURT: No, not necessarily. They just have to provide you notice of what. They don’t have to prove their case, they just have to give you some notice to let you know what you’re being charged with so you can properly prepare your—prepare your defense.
MR. OVERHOLT: Okay.
THE COURT: So, they have to tell you when, where, and what you did. All right. Doesn’t—you’re presumed innocent of the charges. They’ve got to prove you guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
MR. OVERHOLT: This is a two-page statute that has 10 exceptions.
THE COURT: Uh-huh.
MR. OVERHOLT: When you say they have to prove what I did, can they just name that statute or do they have to tell me more specifically?
THE COURT: They only have to provide you with the statute that you violated. All right.
MR. OVERHOLT: Okay.
THE COURT: They have to—they have to provide that defense. Now, you can request a motion for—you can request an additional motion saying, Judge, I still don’t know what I did. All right. And, if that’s the motion after you get their Information, you have to bring that to the Court’s attention by saying I don’t know what I did. I need more information so I can prepare my defense.
MR. OVERHOLT: Okay.
THE COURT: All right. And I don’t know what they’re going to allege or how they’re going to allege it, or what, but you—that’s all that information on the ticket is supposed to be able to provide you, with information of when, where, and what you did wrong. Okay? So, at least you can say you’re not getting blindsided by anything. If you need more information than that after you see it, then you can file a motion asking for more information; or, we can, since you’re representing yourself, you can call Mr. Manning and say, “Hey, what—what are you—what are you saying I did?” All right. “What—what is—what is the—how did I violate it?” And he’ll tell you.
MR. OVERHOLT: Okay.
THE COURT: All right. I’m sure he—I’m sure he’ll tell you. So, if not, then that’s where I come in and say, Judge. And then he can make an argument. We don’t have tell him—or he’s going to have to tell you sometime. All right. I don’t think that’s his answer, but.
Understand?
MR. OVERHOLT: I understand. Thank you for clarifying.
THE COURT: You’re welcome. So, I’ll reserve the ruling on the Motion to Dismiss and we will set this for further bench trial. And, if you’re filing motions, we’ll set that for July 24th at 2:30. I order you to be here on that date and time. I do have to advise if you fail to appear on that date, the trial could take place in your absence.
MR. OVERHOLT: I’ll be there.
THE COURT: I know you will be there. The law requires me to advise you of it. All right.
MR. OVERHOLT: Thank you.
THE COURT: So, if you’re there the trial could take place in your absence and it will be binding upon you as if you are present. And, if you’re found guilty at that hearing when you’re not there, then the sentencing can take place in your absence and that also will be binding upon you as if you’re present. All right.
MR. OVERHOLT: Thank you.
THE COURT: You’re welcome. So, I—we will see—will resume this on—we’ll start the trial hopefully on July 24th at 2:30. I will see you then.
MR. OVERHOLT: Thank you.
THE COURT: All right. You’re welcome. All right.
Court is in recess until 2:30.
